# Hash table

**Definition**: A **hash table** is a data structure that implements a dictionary, which is an abstract data type that maps keys to values.

In the hash table implementation of dictionaries, a $0$-based array $A$ of length $m$ is partially filled with $n$ elements where $m\ge n$. For this hash table, a key $K$ is stored at the index $h(K)$ of $A$ where $h$ is a **hash function** and $h(K)$ is called a **hash code**.

## Load factor

**Definition**: A load factor, denoted by $\alpha$, is defined as:

$$
\alpha:=\frac{n}{m}
$$

where $n$ represents the number of elements in a hash table, and $m$ is the size of underlying array. 

The load factor maintains the performance of a hash table. If the load factor exceeds a maximum threshold, the hash table is scaled up, and if the load factor drops below minimum threshold, it is scaled down.

## Hash function

**Definition**: A hash table uses a **hash function** to convert a key into an index which is used to indicate the corresponding value.

**Definition**: A **hash code** is the index  generated by a **hash function**.

## Hash collision

**Definition**: A **hash collision** occurs when a hash function assigns the same index to more than one key. The two common methods for collision resolution are **separate chaining** and **open addressing**.

### Separate chaining

**Definition**: In **separate chaining**, a collision is resolved by building a linked list. Each collided items are chained together, which can be traversed to access the item with a unique search key.

### Open addressing

**Definition**: In **open addressing**, a collision resolved through **probing**. 

When a new entry has to be inserted, the array is examined, starting with the hashed-to index and proceeding in some **probe sequence**, until an unoccupied index is found. 

When searching for an entry, the array is scanned in the same sequence, until either the target value is found, or an unused array slot is found, which indicates an unsuccessful search.

## Operations

| Operation | Average     | Worst case |
| --------- | ----------- | ---------- |
| Search    | $\Theta(1)$ | $O(n)$     |
| Insert    | $\Theta(1)$ | $O(n)$     |
| Delete    | $\Theta(1)$ | $O(n)$     |
